----

https://www.historyofcg.com/pages/xerox-parc/

----

https://www.vice.com/en/article/wnpqnm/the-1970s-graphics-program-that-spurred-space-exploration-computer-picassos-and-pixar

The 1970s Graphics Program That Spurred Space Exploration, Computer Picassos and Pixar
Richard Shoup
Alvy Ray Smith
Larry Clark
Bob Flegal
Patrick Baudelaire

----

https://rmozone.com/snapshots/2015/05/Innocent_in_Palo_Alto.pdf

----

https://www.alexanderjarvis.com/why-alto/

----

https://worrydream.com/refs/Kay_1976_-_Personal_Dynamic_Media_(LRG).pdf

----

https://worrydream.com/refs/Ingalls_2020_-_The_Evolution_of_Smalltalk.pdf

----

https://michaelnotebook.com/notes/kay/Personal_Computing_1975.pdf

----

https://www.computerhistory.org/revolution/input-output/14/348

----

https://bitsavers.org/pdf/xerox/smalltalk/Smalltalk-72_Instruction_Manual_Mar76.pdf

----

https://www.tech-insider.org/star/research/acrobat/8108.pdf

----

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light_of_Other_Days

----

https://tinlizzie.org/IA/index.php/Alan_Kay_at_OOPSLA_1997:_The_Computer_Revolution_has_not_Happened_Yet

----

"There is no information content in Alan Kay." -Alan Kay

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XnFWlU5Gv8A

A former professional jazz guitarist and composer, he is now an amateur classical pipe-organist.

"You have to form the habit of not being right for very long." -Marvin Minsky

----

The Early History of Smalltalk

SIGPLAN, most complete, including appendix:

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221501755_The_Early_History_of_Smalltalk

Brett Victor's page:

https://worrydream.com/EarlyHistoryOfSmalltalk/

Spacewar, 1962

One of the first video games, developed at MIT on the PDP-1 by Steve Russell and colleagues.

https://www.masswerk.at/spacewar

https://www.wheels.org/spacewar/stone/rolling_stone.html

SPACEWAR: Fanatic Life and Symbolic Death Among the Computer Bums,
by Stewart Brand.

[...]

I’m guessing that Alan Kay at Xerox Research Center (more on them
shortly) has a line on it, defining the standard Computer Bum: “About
as straight as you’d expect hotrodders to look. It’s that kind of
fanaticism. A true hacker is not a group person. He’s a person who
loves to stay up all night, he and the machine in a love-hate
relationship... They’re kids who tended to be brilliant but not very
interested in conventional goals. And computing is just a fabulous
place for that, because it’s a place where you don't have to be a
Ph.D. or anything else. It’s a place where you can still be an
artisan. People are willing to pay you if you're any good at all, and
you have plenty of time for screwing around.”

The hackers are the technicians of this science - “It’s a term of
derision and also the ultimate compliment.” They are the ones who
translate human demands into code that the machines can understand and
act on. They are legion. Fanatics with a potent new toy. A mobile
new-found elite, with its own apparat, language and character, its own
legends and humor. Those magnificent men with their flying machines,
scouting a leading edge of technology which has an odd softness to it;
outlaw country, where rules are not decree or routine so much as the
starker demands of what’s possible.

[...]

Low-rent ... but pervasive. Alan Kay: “The game of Spacewar blossoms
spontaneously wherever there is a graphics display connected to a
computer.”

[...]

The beauty was, that being at the very top of the Defense
Establishment, the agency had little Congressional scrutiny had little
bureaucratic responsibility, able to take creative chances and protect
long-term deep-goal projects. Alan Kay: "90 percent of all good things
that I can think of that have been done in computer science have been
done funded by that agency. Chances that they would have been funded
elsewhere are very low. The basic ARPA idea is that you find good
people and you give them a lot of money and then you step back. If
they don't do good things in three years they get dropped - where
'good' is very much related to new or interesting."

Legends abound from early ARPA days, full of freedom and weirdness.
Here's one of many from Project MAC (Multiple Access Computer) days -
Alan Kay: "They had a thing on the PDP-l called 'The Unknown Glitch'
["Glitch" - a kink, a less-than-fatal but irritating fuck-up]. They
used to program the thing either in direct machine code, direct octal,
or in DDT, In the early days it was a paper-tape machine. It was
painful to assemble stuff, so they never listed out the programs. The
programs and stuff just lived in there, just raw seething octal code.
And one of the guys wrote a program called 'The Unknown Glitch,' which
at random intervals would wake up, print out I AM THE UNKNOWN GLITCH.
CATCH ME IF YOU CAN, and then it would relocate itself somewhere else
in core memory, set a clock interrupt, and go back to sleep. There was
no way to find it."

[...]

I asked Alan Kay if Spacewar had been played over the Net. He said
it's possible. I asked if there'd been international Spacewar yet, and
was told a story. "There's. a problem there of sending code groups,
When Greenblatt's chess program reigned supreme, they tried to play
one of. the Russian chess œ programs. Instead of doing it by mail or
using an international phone call ' they decided to do it by amateur
radio. i There's this federal statute against ' transmitting code
groups of any kind,; including chess moves. It took a long time to
straighten that out. There was eventual communication with the
Russians through a ham link in Switzerland."

[...]

Alan Kay, 32, child prodigy (National Quiz Kid at ten), former
musician and artist, worked with Ivan Sutherland and Dave Evans at
Utah, presently a researcher at Xerox. Alan shifts comfortably in his
office bean-bag chair and appraises his colleagues. "This is really a
frightening group, by far the best I know of as far as talent and
creativity. The people here all have track records and are used to
dealing lightning with both hands."

Peter Deutsch, bearded and intent, 26, veteran of the early days at
Project MAC, has served on every major front in computer science, now
has a cubicle near Kay's at Xerox Research Center. Alan remarks on his
neighbor, "Peter is in my opinion the world's greatest programmer.
He's much more than a hacker, although he has some of that style. He's
a virtuoso; his programs have very few mistakes. He has probably more
written code running than anybody in the ARPA community."

[...]
